 SOUTH CHINA KARST 
===================

CHINA
=====

*These three remarkable landscapes are spectacular representatives of
forested humid tropical to subtropical karst. They show an exceptional
variety of karstic forms and the evidence of their complex evolution,
some being world reference types for these landforms. Visually,
especially in the Shilin stone forests, the effects are astonishing for
their fantastic and bizarre picturesqueness.*

COUNTRY
-------

China

NAME
----

South China Karst

NATURAL WORLD HERITAGE SERIAL SITE
----------------------------------

2007: Inscribed on the World Heritage List under Natural Criteria vii
and viii.

STATEMENT OF OUTSTANDING UNIVERSAL VALUE
----------------------------------------

The UNESCO World Heritage Committee issued the following statement at
the time of inscription.

South China is unrivalled for the diversity of its karst features and
landscapes. The property includes specifically selected areas that are
of outstanding universal value to protect and present the best examples
of these karst features and landscapes. South China Karst is a coherent
serial property comprising three clusters, Libo Karst and Shilin Karst,
each with two components, and Wulong Karst with three components.

**Criterion (vii):** South China Karst represents one of the world's
most spectacular examples of humid tropical to subtropical karst
landscapes. The stone forests of Shilin are considered superlative
natural phenomena and the world reference site for this type of feature.
The cluster includes the Naigu stone forest occurring on dolomitic
limestone and the Suyishan stone forest arising from a lake. Shilin
contains a wider range of pinnacle shapes than other karst landscapes
with pinnacles, and a higher diversity of shapes and colours that change
with different weather and light conditions. The cone and tower karsts
of Libo, also considered the world reference site for these types of
karsts, form a distinctive and beautiful landscape. Wulong includes
giant collapse depressions, called Tiankeng, and exceptionally high
natural bridges between which are long stretches of very deep unroofed
caves. These spectacular karst features are of world class quality.

**Criterion (viii):** Both Shilin and Libo are global reference areas
for the karst features and landscapes that they exhibit. Major
developments in the stone forests of Shilin occurred over some 270
million years during four major geological time periods from the Permian
to present, illustrating the episodic nature of the evolution of these
karst features. Libo contains carbonate outcrops of different ages that
erosive processes shaped over millions of years into impressive Fengcong
(cone) and Fenglin (tower) karsts. It contains a combination of numerous
tall karst peaks, deep dolines, sinking streams and long river caves.
Wulong represents high inland karst plateaus that have experienced
considerable uplift, and its giant dolines and bridges are
representative of South China's Tiankeng landscapes. Wulong's landscapes
contain evidence for the history of one of the world's great river
systems, the Yangtze and its tributaries.

The property is well managed, with clear management plans in place and
the effective involvement of various stakeholders. There are strong
international networks in place to support continued research and
management. Of the three clusters, Wulong has suffered the least human
impact by virtue of its remoteness and retains natural values that have
been reduced in other comparable areas. Continued efforts are required
to expand and refine buffer zones to protect upstream catchments and
their downstream and underground continuation in order to maintain water
quality at a level that ensures the long term conservation of the
property and its subterranean processes and ecosystems. At Wulong the
boundaries of the core zone should be considered for extension, and a
single landscape-scale buffer zone would be a significant improvement to
encompass all of the Tiankeng elements to the north of the Furong gorge.
Traditional management by minority peoples is an important feature of
both clusters, and the relationship between karst and the cultural
identity and traditions of minority groups including the Yi (Shilin) and
the Shui, Yao and Buyi (Libo) requires continued recognition and respect
in site management. Potential for further extension of the property
requires development of a management framework for effective
coordination between the different clusters.

INTERNATIONAL DESIGNATION
-------------------------

> 1996: Maolan National Nature Reserve designated a Biosphere Reserve
> under UNESCO’s Man and Biosphere Programme (21,330 ha).

IUCN MANAGEMENT CATEGORY
------------------------

Shilin National Park: Unassigned

Maolan National Nature Reserve: V Protected Landscape

Zhangjiang National Scenic and Historic Area: Unassigned

Furongjiang National Scenic and Historic Area: Unassigned

BIOGEOGRAPHICAL PROVINCE
------------------------

Shilin: Chinese Subtropical Forest (2.1.2);

Libo: Oriental Deciduous Forest (2.15.6);

Wulong: SIchuan Highlands (2.39.12).

GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION
---------------------

These three similar karstic regions are located in southwest China.
Shilin Karst is 78 km northeast of the city of Kunming in Yunnan
Province, centred on 24^o^47’30”N by 103^o^16’30”E; Libo Karst is some
150 km southeast of Guiyang city in Guizhou province, centred on
25^o^13’15”N by 107^o^58’30”E; and Wolong Karst is some 110 km east of
Chongqing city, Sichuan province, centred on 29^o^13’48”N by
107^o^54’12”E. Libo is equidistant 435 km from both Shilin and Wolong
which are some 600 km apart.

DATES AND HISTORY OF ESTABLISHMENT
----------------------------------

1931: Shilin Stone Forest designated a Yunnan Provincial Park; 1942:
first development plan, later revised 3 times;

1982: Shilin designated a National Scenic & Historic Area and National
Park;

1987: Twenty-year (1982-2002) masterplan approved; updated 2004;

2001: Shilin stone forests designated a National Geological Park;

2004: Shilin designated a UNESCO Global Geopark.

1975-85: The Libo area karst forest was discovered and surveyed;

1988: Maolan National Nature Reserve designated (part of Libo east
site);

1994: Zhangjiang River designated a National Scenic & Historic Area
(part of Libo west site);

1996: Maolan Reserve designated a UNESCO Biosphere Reserve;

1992: Furong Dong (cave) discovered; 1995: protective measures adopted
for Furong Jiang (river);

1998-2002: Three Natural Bridges (Sanqiao) and Houping karst
investigated for karst and tourist resources;

2002: Furongjiang area declared a National Scenic and Historic Area;

2003: Wulong Karst declared a National Geological Park;

2005: Wulong Karst management plan adopted.

LAND TENURE
-----------

Shilin Karst: State, rural collective and private, in the Yi Nationality
Autonomous County of Shilin.

Libo Karst: State and private, in the Southern Guizhou Buyi and Miao
Nationalities Autonomous Prefecture, Guizhou. Wolong: State and private.
Wulong Karst is in Wulong County, Chongqing City, Sichuan.

AREAS
-----

Total core area: 47,588 ha

Total buffer zone: 98,428 ha

Total of core and buffer zones: 146,016 ha

  -------------------- ---------------- --------------- -----------------
  **Site **            **Total area**   **Core area**   **Buffer zone**

  Shilin:              35,000 ha        12,070 ha       22,930 ha
                                                        
  Naigu Stone Forest                    1,746 ha        
                                                        
  Suogeyi Village                       10,324 ha       

  Libo:                73,016 ha        29,518 ha       43,498 ha
                                                        
  Xiaoqijong                            7,834 ha        
                                                        
  Dongduo                               21,684 ha       

  Wulong:              38,000 ha        6,000 ha        32,000 ha
                                                        
  Qingkou Tiankeng                      1,246 ha        
                                                        
  Sanqiao                               2,202 ha        
                                                        
  Furongdong                            2,552 ha        
  -------------------- ---------------- --------------- -----------------

Libo’s east site incorporates Maolan National Nature Reserve.

Libo’s west site includes parts of the Zhangjiang Scenic and Historic
Interest Area.

Wulong incorporates Furongjiang Scenic & Historic Interest Area and
National Geological Park.

ALTITUDE
--------

Shilin: 1,560m - 2,203m (Mt.Wenbi);

Libo: ~\~~385m - 1,109m

Wulong: ~\~~200m - 1,510m

PHYSICAL FEATURES
-----------------

The nominated sites are spread across nearly 500,000 square kilometres
of subtropical karst landscapes in southern and southwestern China
(7.15% of the country’s area). This is mostly based on a very thick
sequence of hard compacted limestones and dolomite laid down during
early Permian to Triassic periods 270 million years ago. The limestone
platforms are situated at the junction of the Indian, the South China
and the Pacific plates and are subject to tectonic movement. The four
main movements which uplifted them occurred during a continuous cycle of
uplift and denudation, deposition and erosion in the Palaeozoic period
400-250 million years ago (mya), in the late Triassic, 200 mya, in the
Jurassic to Cretaceous periods, 200-70 mya and in the Eocene Himalayan
orogeny 50 mya. Originally continental marine limestones were overlaid
in the Permian by basalt and in the Cretaceous and Tertiary periods by
marine sand and clay deposits. In the west the area was uplifted some
1,200m to become a plateau during the Himalayan orogeny, accompanied by
jointing; in the east it has been stable or slightly subsident. It is
unglaciated and the climate and erosive forces have always been tropical
and humid, promoting dissolution. The result of this complex of
processes is an enormous range of karstic landscapes: knife-edge
pinnacles, deep sharp fins (karren), towers, pillars, cones, gorges and
caves, all still subject to erosion. The process also left an eloquent
record in fossils from late Palaeozoic times on.

In Shilin the two sites, the Lunan and Naigu stone forests, lie along
20km of an undulating plateau, divided by 4.5km of a populous valley.
They are excellent examples of plateau karst pinnacles and knife-edged
karren, representative of the many stone forests of the South China
Karst, formed mainly in late Permian carbonates from the complex
fracturing and lattice jointing of the uplifted plateau. Stone forests
resulted from frequent fissuring, hills from infrequent fissuring, and
razor ridges where the two fracture planes intersected. Their formation
was complex: stone forests and teeth formed from the Permian layer were
covered by basalt lava which was then uplifted and eroded. 50 million
years ago a lake with red clay sediments buried the pinnacles again;
they were then gradually re-exposed, emerging from the eroded bedrock as
landscapes of packed sword-edge pinnacles, rock teeth and forests of
close-set pillars and towers. There are depressons and dolines, more
than 80 lakes, more than 50 small ponds and springs and nine underground
rivers. The soils are red earth and calcareous.

Libo: Hundreds of cone-shaped hills lie in rolling country covered in
virgin forest harboring great biological diversity. The region, over
millions of years starting in the end of the Precambrian, experienced a
series of periods of uplift and karstic erosion, marine invasion and
sedimentation, several phases of tectonic activity, faulting and
planation. The origin of the present landscapes was in the late
Precambrian and Palaeozoic eras when limestones, dolomites and dolomitic
limestones some 8,600m thick were deposited, the karst developing
differently in different rocks. The present landform results from an
ancient tectonic fault-fold zone with many unconformities between the
middle Devonian and its underlying strata and between the upper
Cretaceous strata and the underlying Permian and Triassic strata.
Tectonic activity resulted in a trough fold system of parallel and
gigantic box-like anticlines 30-50km wide with steep flanks, and tight
synclines. In the centre of the anticlines, Carboniferous and Permian
carbonates outcrop widely, middle Triassic clastic rocks outcrop in the
axes of the synclines, and partial red beds in the tectonic basin. Since
the Quaternary, the final phase of this long and intense karst
development is the present majestic plateau-gorge landscapes of Libo
which continue to form today as the Pacific and China Plates converge,
uplifting the land from west to east by 760 to 600m, causing the rivers
to cut deeper still. The result is one of the most diverse karst
landscapes in the world.

These two sites, 15km apart, are typical of humid tropical-subtropical
cone karst, rejuvenating through successive cycles of uplift, solution,
deposition and erosion. They are exceptional examples of *fengkong*
landscapes (of conjoined cone-shaped peaks) and *fenglin* landscapes
(separated peaks on a plain). They are sited between the plateau and the
lowland, with clusters of tall narrow peaks, deep dolines and flat
valleys, depressions *(poljes),* plains, gorges, rivers and long
caverns. *Fengcong* karst, where positive landforms outnumber negative
landforms, is a combination of connected conical hills 100-300m high,
and enclosed depressions, valleys and gorges, well watered and forested.
*Fengcong* valleys are narrow, flat and dry, mostly bare, but in gorges
incised by uplift there are steep fast-flowing rivers in narrow beds;
*fengcong* depression karst is characterized by enclosed depressions*.
Fenglin* karst locally consists of isolated cones to 150m high on broad
and flat karst peneplains covered by thin regolith where the negative
landforms outnumber positive forms. *Fenglin* depressions are large and
shallow with irregular sinkholes, in some of which dolines have
developed. *Fenglin* valleys are wide and flat, with alluvial deposits
around their margins, many rivers, lakes, swamps, caves and wall
springs. Karstification continues as the landscape is rejuvenated from
open *fenglin* valleys to sunken *fengcong* depressions and to narrow
*fengcong* valleys and gorges. Caves at two levels at 1100m and 800m are
widespread in both kinds of karst, often truncated by erosion, with
entrances anywhere in the cones. They are horizontal, long, much
branched, with extensive speleothem deposits. The speleothem color
indicates when they were deposited, with red speleothems dating from the
Cretaceous, grayish tawny brown from the Tertiary to the early
Quaternary, and grayish white-gray from more recent time. The Triassic
marine sediments are rich in fossils, an outstanding example being the
marine reptile *Keichousaurus hui.*

The Wulong Karst is an uplifted mountain landscape with deep gorges and
dolines, natural bridges and caves containing speleothems which displays
a long history of geological evolution and an unusual range of karst
formations. Its three components are the Furong Cave system, the Three
Natural Bridges and the Houping collapsed doline *(tiankeng*) with 15km
separating each. Its 2,000m thick carbonate rocks were deposited from
the Cambrian to the Silurian and again from the Permian to the Triassic
periods. In the middle Triassic the area was uplifted and in the late
Jurassic folded and faulted establishing the basic pattern of joints and
faults. The karst is composed of a series of anticlines and synclines
with the Cambrian and Ordovician carbonates outcropping on the
anticlines while the Triassic and Jurassic carbonates outcrop on the
synclines. The Cenozoic Himalayan orogeny led to the formation of
denudation plains, deeply incised gorges and several kinds of karst. The
Furong cave and exceptionally large *tiankeng* dolines developed in the
Cambrian and Ordovician carbonates. The Three Natural Bridges developed
in the Triassic carbonates. Soils are yellow, yellow-brown and alkaline.

The Furong Cave system has 2,846m of explored passages with chambers as
high as 80m. The deposits and speleothem fragments are a valuable
geological record. In it, calcite, aragonite and gypsum crystals, cave
pearls, needles and helictites all grow, along with stalagtites,
draperies, and stalagmites in massive, raft and palm-tree forms. The
three substantial natural bridges which occur along the steep course of
the Yangshuihe river are between 96 and 116m high, 28 to 34 m wide. The
*tiankengs* are the result of the collapse of giant dolines during
tectonic uplift. The largest, Qingkou, is 220-250m wide, 295m deep and
40,754 sq.m in area. There are also unusually deep shaft caves such as
Qikeng which is 920m deep.

CLIMATE
-------

The climates are humid tropical to sub-humid subtropical (Wulong). They
are subject to both the temperate humid southeast and hot dry southwest
monsoons, with most rain falling between May and October, and to cold
air drainage from the Tibetan plateau. Winters are warm, summers are
cool. Mean January and July temperatures for Shilin are 8.2^o^C and
20.8^o^C; for Libo: 5^o^C and 23^o^C; for Wulong: 11.2^o^C and 18.5^o^C.
Average rainfall is in Shilin, 800-850mm, Libo, 1,752mm and Wulong,
1,105mm.

VEGETATION
----------

The sites contain the world’s most intact subtropical karst forest,
dominated by evergreen broadleaved *Castanopsis* and *Cyclobalanopsis*
forest and evergreen mixed broadleaf-conifer forest of *Platycarya
longipes* and *Pinus kwangtungensis.* The nominated sites are located
between three biogeographical provinces, Sino-Himalayan, Sino-Japanese
and East Asian, so the transitional vegetation has great variety
including xerophytes, lithophytes and calciphiles typical of droughty
highly calcareous lithosols. As a result it is a model of the
geological, biological and ecological processes typical of the climate
and soil.

Shilin: the sites contain 889 species of vascular plants, in 533 genera
and 147 families with 43 species of Pteridophyte and 13 gymnosperm
species. Four types of forest cover 32% of the karst: partially
drought-resistant evergreen broad-leaved *Cyclobanopsis glaucoides*, and
*Castanopsis delavayi,* endemic to the southwestern karst;
sclerophyllous evergreen broad-leaved forest of *Quercus cocciferoides*
and *Quercus franchetti*; deciduous broad-leaved forest; and subtropical
needle-leaved forest with *Pinus yunnanensis,* found throughout west
China. Other vegetation types are shrublands, grasslands with occasional
trees and meadows and an *Ottelia acuminata* lake community. The flora
consists of the elements of three forest sub-regions: Sino-Himalayan,
Sino-Japanese and East Asian. There are eight species of nationally
protected plants and almost 100 rare and locally endemic species.

The Libo Karst sites contain 1,532 vascular species in 687 genera and
225 families, 144 species of bryophyte and 212 species of pteridophyte.
This includes 17 gymnosperm species. The 284 tropical angiosperms genera
are 40.1% of the total, 20.5% are subtropical and 35.4% are temperate.
The nominated sites have amongst the greatest number of nationally
protected plants of any karst area in China: 112 species, about 43% of
the flora of Guizhou Province and 10% of China’s total. The 18 species
listed in the IUCN Red List include one critically endangered and 9
vulnerable species. The national Red List includes 7 critically
endangered, 26 endangered and 50 vulnerable species, many endemic. Among
the nationally protected species are 8 species in class I and 104
species in class II.

8 genera in the nominated sites are endemic to China, plus 5 endemic
genera with several endemic species. To date, 41 species are recorded as
endemic to Libo Karst, They include 14 tree, 12 shrub, 7 liana and 8
herb species. The threatened endemics include *Paphiopedium emersonii*
(CR). Ancient and relict plants, like the ancient Cymnospermae are
represented by 17 species. These are widespread and dominant on each
cone summit; one, *Tetrathyrium subcordatum*, is extremely rare in East
Asia and Libo is considered the center of its distribution.

The widely distributed climax communities are mainly evergreen/deciduous
broad-leaved mixed forests. This forest type is extremely rare at this
altitude and is of exceptionally high scientific interest. There is also
a local bamboo forest of *Dendrocalamus tsiangii*. The four dominant
forest types are: warm coniferous forest of *Pinus kwangtungensis*; warm
mixed needle and broad-leaved forests of *Pseudotsuga sinensis* with
*Platycarya longipes* and *Pseudotsuga sinensis*-*Pinus kwangtungensis*
with *Quercus phillyraeoides*; evergreen and deciduous broad-leaved
mixed forest of *Cyclobalanopsis glauca* with *Platycarya longipes*,
also mixed forests of *Phellodendron amurense - Platycarya longipes,*
*Platycarya longipes* -*Viburnum, Handeliodendron
bodinieri* -*Aceraceae*, *Viburnum* -*Schefflera octophylla,
Sterculiaceae* -*Cyclobalanopsis glauca*, *Taxus cuspidate* -*Lindera*,
*Koelrenteria paniculata* -*Aceraceae* mixed forest and *Castanopsis
fargesii* -*Elaeocarpaceae*.

Wulong: The steep, little disturbed Furong river gorge retains a rare
and diverse vegetation where the seasonal vegetation colour changes are
dramatically beautiful. There are 558 vascular plant species in 139
families and 375 genera, including 56 pteridophytes. The dominant forest
is of subtropical evergreen broad-leaved trees with deciduous
broad-leaved forest of *Quercus fabric, Quercus acutissima* and
*Kalopanax ricinifolius* and *Liquidambar formosana*. The seasonal color
changes are very beautiful. There is subtropical needle-leaved forest of
*Pinus massoniana* and *Cupressus funebri* and temperate coniferous
forest. There is also some bamboo forest and bamboo scrub, including
*Phyllostachys heteroclada* and *Sinoca lamusaffinis,* and some tussock
grassland. The similar vegetation of the Three Natural Bridges buffer
zone is mostly secondary, but diverse, and composed of forest trees,
coppice forest, shrubland and grassland. Typical protected species are
*Ginkgo biloba*, *Cinnamomum camphora*, *Actinidia chinensis*, *Taxus
chinensis*, *Handliodendron bodinieri*, *Liriodendron chinense*,
*Juglans regia*, and *Phellodendron chinense*.

FAUNA
-----

In Shilin National Park there are 185 species: 42 mammal, 87 bird, 32
reptile, 12 amphibian and 12 fish species. Of these 7 small rodents and
8 bird species of birds are on the Chinese Red List. These include the
Lady Amherst pheasant *Chrysolophus amherstiae*. Cave animals include
bats and 11 species of cave fish. One, *Triplophysa shilinensis,* was
discovered in the river in Weiboyi Cave in 1991 and only five have ever
been found. Of the several Palaearctic species many are drought
tolerant.

Libo: The nominated sites have an extremely diverse fauna belonging
largely to the Oriental and Palearctic realms in the approximate ratio
of 80% to 20%, including many that are endemic and endangered. There are
314 species\* of vertebrate fauna, including 59 species of mammal, 137
species of birds, 23 of which breed locally, 43 species of reptiles, 32
species of amphibians and 43 species of fish, including some from the
Pearl River system to the south. Also recorded are 1,282 species of
insects, 140 species of land snails, 146 species of arachnids and 10
species of myriapods. 45 globally threatened species live in the
reserve. These include the white-sideburned leaf monkey *Trachypithecus
francoisi* (VU) the clouded leopard *Neofelis nebulosa* (VU) and
Elliot’s pheasant *Syrmaticus ellioti*. 35 species are on the national
list of protected fauna, including 3 class I and 32 class II species,
some endemic to Libo. Among the first are leopard *Panthera pardus* and
Burmese python *Python molurus.* 38 species are endemic to the region
and to China; for instance, three endemic species of bat: great evening
bat, *Ia io*, Szechwan myotis *Myotis altarium* and Daubenton’s bat *M.
daubentoni*. In recent years, 124 animal species and some 13 type
species have been discovered in Libo. (\*The nomination quotes two
differing sets of species totals).

In addition there are 174 species of cave fauna, including 13 species of
bats, 37 species of fish, 42 species of spiders and 58 species of land
snails, forming respectively 7.5%, 21.3%, 24.1% and 33.3% of the total
cave fauna. There are also 10 species of myriapods, 14 other species of
invertebrates, three endemic genera and 17 endemic species. Recently 20
new species of cave-adapted fauna were discovered in the Dongge cave,
and many new species are likely to be found, especially amongst the cave
fauna. This richness of endemics makes the Libo sites especially
important to the study of local and karstic cave species.

Wulong: In these karst sites and buffer zones, especially the
steep-sided forested Furongjiang valley and, Three Natural Bridges
areas, human activities are limited so the area has become an animal
refuge. The faunal diversity is extremely rich, totaling 332 species: 46
mammals 174 birds, 20 amphibians, 28 reptiles and 64 species of fish.
Its rare animals include four species with level 1 national protection:
clouded leopard (VU), white-sideburned leaf monkey (VU), Chinese
pangolin *Manis pentadactyla* (EN) and golden eagle *Aquila chrysaetos*.
Nineteen species on the second level of national protection include
Asian wild dog *Cuon alpinus* (EN), stumptailed macaque *Macaca
arctoides* (VU), rhesus macaque *Macaca mulatta*, leopard *Panthera
pardus*, the viverrids spotted linsang, *Prionodon pardicolor*, and
large and small Indian civets *Viverra zibetha* and *Viverricula
indica*, Asiatic golden cat *Pardofelis temminckii*, yellow-throated
marten *Martes flavigula*, Eurasian otter *Lutra lutra*, the forest musk
deer *Moschus berezovskii* (EN) and golden and Reeves’s pheasants
*Chrysolophus pictus* and *Syrmaticus reevesii* (VU). The 64 species of
fish found in Furongjiang include 33 endemic species. Two endemic
mammals are tufted deer *Elaphodus cephalophus* and Pére David’s rock
squirrel *Sciurotamias davidianus*. In the Qishiercha and Xienren Caves,
bats, spiders and butterflies are found, and in the waters of Xianren
and Longquan Caves, tadpoles and blind fish.

CONSERVATION VALUE
------------------

The three sites display spectacular intact and representative landscapes
of continental subtropical forested karst weathering in an unusually
great variety of both karstic forms and evidence of their complex
evolution. Visually, especially in the Shilin stone forests, the effects
are astonishing in their fantastic and bizarre picturesqueness. The
sites lie partly within a WWF Global 200 Eco-region, and form a
BirdLife-designated Endemic Bird Area.

CULTURAL HERITAGE
-----------------

Humans have lived in Shilin since Paleolithic times and the Sani Yi can
be traced back to 300 BC. The area has long been exploited for its soil,
forest, stone and mineral resources. The stone forests are intimately
connected with the life of the Yi, their religion, celebrations and
dance; and their extraordinary forms are a celebrated part of the
artistic and garden-making heritage of China. In the Libo area the Shui
people of the Maolan Nature Reserve have managing the area sustainably
for at least 1,000 years, for non-timber forest products such as foods,
medicines, decorative plants and craft materials; felling of useful
trees and the cultivation of marshes and wetlands were prohibited by
village law. The Shui have a unique asset in Shui Shu, an ancient
written language with pictographic characters similar to Shang Dynasty
characters carved between the 16^th^ and 11^th^ centuries BC on tortoise
shells and animal bones. Their encyclopedic writings cover divination,
local geography, ethics, religion, culture, aesthetics and laws of the
ethnic group.

LOCAL HUMAN POPULATIONS
-----------------------

In Shilin the Yi people include the Sani, Axi and Azhe, and are the
dominant minority population, increasing by some 7% a year. Three of
their farm villages lie within the site where they apply traditional
measures for conserving their environment with little use of costly and
polluting pesticides and herbicides. There are 150 ha of farmland for
subsistence crops of corn, beans and potatoes and cash crops of tobacco
and fruit trees, but no grazing livestock except for penned cattle in
the buffer zone. In 2004, 961 people lived in the core and 4,632 in the
buffer zone. In Libo the populations of the two sites and buffer zone
are 5,751 and 24,747 respectively, increasing slowly. There are 13
agricultural villages and patches of some 190 ha of subsistence farmland
within the core sites. Aboriginal minorities, such as the Yao, Buyi,
Zhuang, Miao and Shui form 84.2% of the population, and preserve their
traditional customs and methods of conservation. They depend on
sustainable farming of rice, corn, beans and rapeseed with cash crops of
sour plums and bamboo. They also live on hunting and collecting
medicinal herbs, though eco- and folklore tourism are becoming
alternatives. The Shui have great pride in their environment, especially
for their techniques for preventing wildfires. In Wulong the steep gorge
sides are little inhabited. However, in 2004 the core sites had 3,940
inhabitants and the agricultural buffer zones 23,993. These were to be
relocated by 2020 and the land returned to forest and grass. Its
character resembled the other sites’. The total population living in the
three core zones in 2004 was 10,652.

VISITORS AND VISITOR FACILITIES
-------------------------------

The stone forests of Shilin have been visited for centuries. By 1988
they had 1,000,000 annual visitors, by 2005, 2,050,000, and numbers may
soon have to be limited. At present to minimise impacts, guided tours
are staggered and only certain areas are open to tourists. The minority
peoples are supported by government partly for their contribution to
tourism: the Yi people entertain visitors with their music, dance,
athletic games and costumes, providing one of the distinguishing
attractions. There are 16 km of signed trails, the Stone Forest Museum,
a visitors’ centre with restaurant, 30 shops, 300 guides, 3 search &
rescue teams and accommodation outside the core area. An educational
museum is planned and tourist facilities and waste disposal are to be
improved and moved outside the core area. There is train access to
Shilin from Kunming.

In Libo, annual tourist numbers increased from 100,000 in 2000 to
280,000 in 2004. By 2020 they may be over one million and their
movements and vehicles must be carefully controlled. High class tourism
resources are available: 34 km of signed trails, 35 guides, cave
exploration and climbing, a visitors’ centre, educational ecotourism, 4
restaurants, shops and two help & rescue centres. There is nearby
accommodation and a visitors’ centre and museum are planned. As in
Shilin, the Yao people welcome and entertain the tourists, and have a
high-profile welcoming ceremony where men, dressed in homespun, fire a
gun salute.

Visitors to the Furong and Three Bridges areas in Wulong totaled 100,000
in 2000 and 380,000 in 2005. However the road to Three Bridges is narrow
and the space in Furong cave is limited. Half the cave passages are out
of bounds to the public and only 2.5 km of the gorge is open. There are
45km of signed trails, 28 guides, a museum at Three Bridges, 3 visitors’
centers, 3 restaurants, 12 shops and 3 search and rescue teams, mostly
now moved out of the core zones. There is accommodation for over 500
outside the area. Each site has ample published information.

SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH AND FACILITIES
----------------------------------

The sites are an ideal natural experimental base for studying cone karst
forest ecosystems and caves, for historical extrapolation and education
about them. Over 20 foreign and domestic research institutions have
worked on the sites since they became known in the 1980s and cavers from
ten countries have explored over 120km of cave passages. The Lunan Stone
Forest of Shilin has long been investigated and much written about: one
stalagmite for instance, in Dongge cave in Shilin, has been analysed to
give a continuous record of variations in the Asian monsoon over the
past 9,000 years. The richness of endemic species makes the sites
important to the study of the regional flora and fauna, and of their
development and evolution in karst ecosystems. The history, people and
economic opportunities of the region have also been studied. Despite its
having been discovered quite recently, 300 articles have already been
published on the Libo karst and it has become a center for karst
research. Both it and the Wulong karsts may yield many new species,
especially of cave fauna. A Stone Forest Research Centre was established
in Shilin in 1999, the Maolan Reserve has an experimental zone for
research and education and Wulong County has funded a scientific
foundation and a subsidiary institute for karst research.

MANAGEMENT
----------

The sites are protected under the state constitution and laws on
Environmental Protection 1989, Protection of Wildlife, Forestry and
Water, all of 1988 and Regulations for the management of Scenic &
Historic Areas 1985 and Nature Reserves 1994; each site is also
protected under specific provincial regulations. They are managed under
the aegis of the State Ministry of Construction and (Libo) by the State
Forestry Bureau, but each province, city or prefecture also has its own
management agency, as do the Reserves themselves. Shilin has the
Management Bureau of Shilin National Park. Libo is managed by the
Management Bureau for Libo Karst National Scenic Area and Nature
Reserve, by the administrations of Libo Autonomous County, Maolan
National Nature Reserve, Zhangjiang Scenic and Historic Area, and the
local communities. Wulong is managed by the Furongjiang Scenic and
Historic Area Administration.

A 20-year (1982-2002) master plan for Shilin was approved in 1987, and
updated for 2003-2020 in 2004. This details specific Heritage sites and
four conservation zones with lessening degrees of prohibition: Special
Protected zone which is closed to all uses plus the First Class
Protected zone, open to licensed scientists and landscape
restoration,which comprise the core, Buffer or Second Class Protected
zone, and Proving/Tourist-Service or Third Class zone. It is augmented
by detailed guidelines for resource protection, for implementing the
World Heritage Convention, and for the protection of caves and karsts.
Most of both sites are in excellent condition despite heavy visitation.
Libo karst forest was discovered and surveyed between 1975 and 1985. A
master plan is to be drawn up to protect all features of the karst,
karst forest ecosystems, endangered species and their habitats and
scenery. This will start with an inventory and assessment of the
landscape and structures. Strategies are projected for rural development
and land use, economic development and fruit tree planting, research and
monitoring, community participation and staff training,
awareness-raising and publicity. The Maolan National Nature Reserve and
the Daqikong and Xiaoqikong sectors of the Zhangjiang river National
Scenic and Historic Area with their master plans were incorporated in
1989. Zhangjiang reserve has the same four zones; Maolan also has four:
core, buffer, experimental (for ecotourism and research), all in the
Libo karst site, and peripheral, in the buffer zone. The managing agency
and management proposal for Libo were ratified in 2005. The reserve is
in good condition at present but the administrative capacity is stated
in the nomination to be low. There is a possibility of future extension
of the east site into Guangzhou province so the buffer zone is omitted
along the provincial border. Wulong is in good condition. Its buffer
zone is to be extended to protect 60,000ha of the upper catchment area
of the river, lack of resources preventing protection of the whole
catchment.

The government recognises the rights of minority cultures to their land
and traditional languages and that they have managed their land
sustainably in the past, but they are to be helped to adjust to change.
Generally the aim is to prohibit nearly all uses in the core areas, to
restore and augment the native vegetation, to develop and maintain
facilities in conformity with the character of the area, and to regulate
all activities in the buffer and peripheral zones in cooperation with
the local people. In the core sites quarrying and mining, tree-cutting
and deforestation, hunting, setting fires, grazing, land reclamation and
building are prohibited. In buffer zones vehicles, human impacts and
multiple uses are to be controlled; existing industries will be
gradually removed, and slopes over 25^o^ reforested. Measures are taken
to control floods and wastes and conserve soils upstream. The flora and
fauna and natural ecological communities are to be restored, farmlands
in all three core zones being restored to grassland or forest, and the
effects of tourist numbers controlled. Monitoring the condition of the
sites is taken seriously in view of the importance of tourist safety,
notably of geological condition, especially the caves, also of fires,
floods and water quality, species and biodiversity, invasion by alien
species, communities and land uses and the numbers of visitors. Remote
sensing and video surveillance of main trails are used.

The Mulun National Nature Reserve in Guangxi, adjacent to Libo, is
nearly all forested karst of very high geological and biological
quality. It is to be nominated for World Heritage status in Stage II of
this nomination in 2008, together with the disparate sites of Xingyi in
Guizhou, Jinfoshan in Chongqing and Yangshuo in Guangxi – a type
locality for *fenglin* tower karst and of the national tradition of
landscape painting. There are the prospects of a future Stage III
including a transboundary site with the equally rich forested karst of
northern Vietnam.

MANAGEMENT CONSTRAINTS
----------------------

The core areas have been well preserved both by inaccessibility and by
their tribal peoples. The expanding agricultural population round the
three sites is stressing the buffer zone and in places beginning to
encroach on the core. There is some threat from earthquakes, forest
insect pests, invading *Eupatorium coeletrum*, fires (set to improve the
grazing) and both drought and occasional floods. Wulong is also
threatened by mudflows and rock falls. Intensive cave tourism may
threaten their biological resources.

COMPARISON WITH SIMILAR SITES
-----------------------------

The South China Karst of which these sites are the most eloquent
representatives extends over 600 km of area and 2,000m in elevation from
the Yunnan plateau to a tributary Yangtse gorge. They consist of
continental subtropical limestone weathering which exhibits an unusually
great variety of both karstic forms and of evidence of their complex
geological evolution. Visually, especially in the Shilin stone forests,
the effects are astonishing in their fantastic and bizarre
picturesqueness. Other areas of karst in temperate and alpine China are
not easily comparable with these complex humid sub tropical examples. Of
47 World Heritage sites 12 are inscribed for their caves and karst; 26
inscribed for other reasons have cave and karst features, and nine
Cultural sites contain similar elements.

The three sites have been nominated for all four natural World Heritage
criteria. Designation as a site of globally significant continental
subtropical forested karst of outstanding historical geological
interest, ongoing processes and phenomenal scenic quality (categories
vii and vii) is difficult to refute except perhaps for Wulong where the
exceptional cave is rivalled in several of the sites listed above.
Designation for importance for ongoing ecological processes and
biodiversity of habitats and biota (categories ix and x) is clearer on
the national than the global scale.

STAFF
-----

The current fulltime staff for the three sites is: in Shilin 109
professional and 89 management personnel plus 10 part-time security
staff; in Libo, 30 professionals, 72 other fulltime staff plus 500
part-time staff; and in Wulong a total of 101. In Shilin the Yi people
provide park staff and management for the park. Staff training is
planned.

BUDGET
------

Funding for all sites is adequate. In 2004 the budget was RMB245,000,000
(US\$29,500,000). 64% of this came from entry fees, 14% directly from
central government, 8% for projects and 13% from other sources such as
county and municipal governments and donations. For Shilin in 2005,
entry fees totalled RMB160,000,000 (\$US19,254,000); RMB1,630,000,000
(US\$196,149,000) had been earmarked for landscape rehabilitation and
visitor facility projects over the period 2002-2010. For Libo, a total
of RMB267,538,200 (US\$32,233,000) is expected to cover operation of the
Park between 2005 and 2010, 40% being for protection, 17% for research
and exhibition and 12% for ecological restoration. For Wulong the annual
budget is RMB20,000,000 (US\$2,409,600), 13 million from Chongqing
People’s Government, 6 million from Wulong People’s Government and1
million from entry fees.

LOCAL ADDRESSES
---------------

Ministry of Construction of People’s Republic of China, No.9, Sanlihe
Road, Beijing 100835, China.

Construction Department of Yunnan Province; World Heritage Management
Committee of Yunnan Province, No.129, Xichang Road, Kunming 650032,
Yunnan, China.

Construction Department of Guizhou, Guiyang City 550002, Guizhou, China.

Office of World Heritage Application and Management of Guizhou Province,
Guiyang 550001, Guizhou Province, China.

Garden Bureau of Chongqing City; World Heritage Management Committee of
Chongqing City, No.179, Eling Street, Yuzhong Region, Chongqing 400014,
China.

REFERENCES
----------

The principal source for the above information was the original
nomination for World Heritage status supplemented by two reports;
Additional Information and Replies to Questions put by IUCN.

Chen, X*. et al*. (1998). *South China Karst,* Volume I. ZRC SAZU.

Hamilton-Smith, E. (n.d.). *World Heritage Sites Inscribed for Cave and
Karst Features.* IUCN, Gland.

IUCN (2007).*The Red List of Threatened Species.* IUCN, Gland,
Switzerland/Cambridge U.K.

Ministry of Construction (2005). *South China Karst. Shilin Karst
(Yunnan), Libo Karst (Guizhou), Wulong Karst* *(Chongking).* China.
[Contains a bibliography of 222 references]

Ran, J. & Lin, Y. (2005). *Speleology and Biospeleology Research in
Libo.* Guiyang, Guizhou Ethnic Press.

Xie, Y. & Li, Y. (2001). A guide to karst geology, geomorphology and
ecolosystems of Shilin, Yunnan. In *Guidebook for Ecosystems of Semiarid
Karst in North China and Subtropical Karst in Southwest China.* Pp.
59-75.

DATE
----

July 2007, May 2011.
